Different Styles of Engineering Leadership

Micromanagement, Center-out Leadership, Psychological Safety Leadership, and others

The beauty of software engineering comes from the many different ways of solving challenges ahead of us. Our work can be like receiving an unlimited set of LEGO bricks without instructions, just an end goal to achieve. We can be builders, architects, designers, or inventors.

And then we become managers. We set expectations, make decisions, motivate people, and ensure execution—classic, boring managerial work. But that's not entirely true. As engineering leaders, we can also bring some creativity to our work, e.g., through mixing different styles of managing people.

In today's article, we will explore some of them, i.e.:

Micromanagement

Center-out Leadership

Top-down Leadership

Transactional Leadership

Developmental Leadership

Transformational Leadership

Psychological Safety Leadership (based on physiopsychological research and the Polyvagal Theory)

I hope these insights will help you build your unique style for engineering leadership!

Micromanagement

Okay, firstly, let's face this one since micromanagement is also a style. It exists because not all organizations provide the necessary support to their fresh leaders. Because of that, micromanagement is quite common - also in companies that are seen as successful.

Here are a few characteristics of it:

Constant Supervision: monitoring every aspect of a teammate's work and requiring frequent status updates.

Lack of Delegation: not delegating tasks or responsibilities, preferring to do things themselves.

Excessive Control: dictating exactly how tasks should be done, even when the employee has the skills to handle them independently.

Frequent Corrections: lack of trust in the employee's abilities and constant correction of the employee's work.

Sometimes it's hard to blame micromanagers - esp. the ones who were the most senior engineers in a team (or the organization's old guards). They already "saw things", have deep domain knowledge, and remember every single hack they implemented during their journey. However, we must remember that this style of leadership reduces the autonomy of others and lowers the sense of ownership, which can be destructive for engineering teams.

Center-out Leadership

Last year, significant news emerged about the rebound of Barnes & Noble, a bookstore chain previously on a straight path to liquidation. 2023 marked the first year in recent memory when this company expanded rather than contracted.

This success was primarily attributed to their CEO, James Daunt, who implemented a strategy that involved:

Granting autonomy to local managers to make more decisions about their stores (such as which books to stock, ensuring the selection is relevant to their customers),

Reducing the non-book offerings in stores, which also decreased the cognitive load on managers.

James Daunt's actions were a classic example of a transformation from top-down leadership to center-out leadership.

In a center-out leadership, decision rights are distributed within some set of boundaries. This means teams and individuals have the autonomy to make decisions within their areas of expertise, but a framework is still in place to ensure alignment with overall goals and ways of working.

As an engineering leader, you set expectations (such as technical standards, non-functional requirements, product acceptance criteria, hypotheses, principles and guidelines). But then you invite the team to provide their input and collaboratively work on the problems ahead - you set WHAT, and they decide on HOW.

For you, as an engineering leader, the center-out approach opens new ways of working with your team and product stakeholders. By reducing your cognitive load required to always be on top of everything, you can shift your attention to:

Building your understanding of the product context,

Growing and empowering your people,

Managing the strategic direction of the technology you oversee.

The center-out approach is not without its costs and risks. The biggest challenges include:

Complex Decision-Making: Without effective facilitation, discussions may drag on for months without reaching a consensus.

Potential for Chaos and Misalignment: Center-out leadership requires clear boundaries and effective collaboration.

Need for Strong Leadership Skills: In addition to technical expertise, leaders must also develop skills in coaching, facilitating, and empowering their teams effectively.

Top-down Leadership

Sometimes, the environment doesn't allow us to go immediately into a center-out approach. These scenarios include:

Bootstrapping the team, ways of working, and common standards,

Taking the lead during a crisis,

Minimizing variance when we expect exact results (e.g., financial reports).

In such cases, a more classic, top-down approach to leadership can be a better fit.

In a top-down approach, management retains data and decision-making authority. The leader develops or selects the best solutions, and their direct reports are expected to execute these directives. This approach can often be observed at the organizational level, where senior management makes strategic decisions without lower-level consultation and expects teams to implement the decisions made.

Though often viewed as micromanagement, the top-down approach has its strengths. It brings:

Efficiency: Decisions can be made swiftly without needing consensus from multiple stakeholders.

Clarity: Clear directives and expectations can simplify roles and responsibilities.

Control: Managers can enforce policies and standards effectively.

But the main costs and risks are:

Lack of employee engagement,

Risk of misalignment,

Leader's cognitive overload

To read more about the differences between Center-out and Top-down Leadership styles, check the Practical Engineering Management article: Top-down Leadership vs. Center-out Leadership.

Transactional Leadership

Transactional leadership is a traditional top-down approach focused on rewards and punishments, which are supposed to optimize job performance. In this style, leaders pay attention to constraints, mostly around limited resources (time and workforce).

A transactional leader constantly analyzes cost-benefits and weighs competing needs. They continuously "allocate resources," trying to find the most optimal configuration of the team, its priorities while minimizing waste and idle time.

For transactional leaders usually, there are too few people and too many initiatives to handle. In that case, the best a transactional leader can do is to:

Recruit more people or better people,

Improve the current team's allocation based on perceived outcomes (better productivity, profitability, returns, etc.).

But the reality is much more complex. In the dynamic systems we operate, we cannot accurately forecast the time needed to complete the work as a whole, nor can we get precise information from each of our teammates about the time they need to finish their piece.

It has been proven that finding the most optimal scheduling solution for complex systems is impossible - "job-shop scheduling" is an NP-hard problem, meaning that for some scheduling problems, we won't find a solution in finite time.

Also, hiring more people isn't always a good solution. As Price's Law states, the square root of the total number of people in a domain does half of the work. For example, if you have an engineering team with 100 people, Price's Law suggests that 10 people (the square root of 100) will produce 50% of the results. Hiring more also brings more complexity and challenges - even more scheduling, more priorities to handle, and more relationships to maintain.

Each of us occasionally plays transactional leader—we optimize allocation, hire more people, and try to improve productivity. But it's worth remembering that we can do more than just play "optimization chess "with "available resources."

Developmental Leadership

While transactional leadership focuses on acquiring more resources, developmental leadership, before asking for more hires, considers how to grow the current team's creativity and problem-solving capabilities so potential new team members won't operate in the same fashion.

To be a developmental leader, you can't just be inspirational and motivational. Your job is to constantly improve the environment so your team can do great work.

It's not only about investing in people's growth, as the word "developmental" might suggest. Apart from that, you must also focus on improving the conditions under which work is executed.

An extensive source of knowledge here can be the book "Wiring Winning Organizations", which introduces three core aspects of transforming an organization:

Slowification - making the problem-solving process easier.

Simplification - making the problems themselves easier.

Amplification - calling out occurring problems loud and clear.

Developmental leadership is about looking beyond the day-to-day and investing in your team's future. This style encourages us to create an environment where everyone feels empowered to solve problems and innovate.

For more, you can read my article on Practical Engineering Management, where I explore the differences between transactional and developmental leadership and provide some practical examples for implementing them in our work.

Read it here: Developmental Leadership vs. Transactional Leadership

Transformational Leadership

Actually, transformational leadership isn't a different style but rather a synonym for developmental leadership, as described earlier. Yet I put it here because of certain management style aspects connected to this particular term.

Transformational leaders focus on improving software delivery performance by enhancing the team's technical and product management capabilities rather than driving outcomes directly (top-down or transactional leadership).

DORA studied the role of Transformational Leadership and proved that it is highly correlated with SDLC and Organizational performance. According to the research, there are five specific characteristics of this approach:

Visionary,

inspirational communication,

intellectual stimulation,

supportive leadership,

personal recognition.

The leaders of the most high-performing companies usually presented strong behaviors across each of them.

To read more, check DORA's explanation of Transformational Leadership: https://dora.dev/devops-capabilities/cultural/transformational-leadership/

If you want to be an influential and successful leader, I recommend self-assessing these five transformational leadership characteristics each week. If you are looking for a more structured framework that can help you with that, check the Practical Engineering Management's Leader's Week.

Psychological Safety Leadership

The list of leadership styles wouldn't be complete without some materials that come directly from the study of human behavior - psychology.

Many of us have heard about Google's research, which says that psychological safety is a critical factor in high-performing teams.

"In a team with high psychological safety, teammates feel safe to take risks around their team members. They feel confident that no one on the team will embarrass or punish anyone else for admitting a mistake, asking a question, or offering a new idea."

To explore the subject deeper, we shared some insights on Practical Engineering Management, from the latest physiopsychological research and the Polyvagal Theory.

Polyvagal Theory (PVT), developed by American psychologist and neuroscientist Stephen Porges, suggests that our autonomic state acts as a mediator, guiding us from vulnerability in threatening situations to accessibility in supportive environments, aided by safety cues and appropriate social support.

In simpler terms, neuroception engages the resources of the Autonomous Nervous System (ANS) and regulatory systems based on the presence or absence of safety. It serves as our internal "safety radar," operating subconsciously to continually assess our environment through:

Internal Check (Inside): Am I safe? Do I have what I need?

Interpersonal Check (Between): Am I safe? Am I seen, liked, understood, supported?

Environmental Check (Outside): Am I safe here? Do I belong here?

Safety is not just a concept but an embodied state, fundamental to regulation. Based on PVT, there are six basic strategies to make you and your team feel well, safe, and productive:

Clarity: Clear communication about job responsibilities, salary, benefits, and promotion criteria.

Predictability: A leader should be predictable in their demeanor - consistent, stable, and attentive - making it clear what others can expect from them.

Belonging: Nurturing a sense of belonging within the team enhances work atmosphere and effectiveness.

Flexibility and Sensitivity: Support employees through personal hardships, reinforcing safety and stability rather than conditional support.

Co-regulation: Effective teams are characterized by ongoing relationships based on mutual regulation and trust.

A Sensory-Friendly Environment: Reducing sensory overload helps facilitate deep work. Leaders should strive to minimize unnecessary distractions in the work environment.

Check the latest article on Practical Engineering Management: Safety Leadership and Neuroception - How the Polyvagal Theory Enhance Workplace Safety, Engagement, and Performance.

End words

Effective engineering leadership embraces a variety of styles, each with its own set of advantages and challenges. The best leaders blend these styles, continuously evaluating and adapting their approach to foster a culture of growth, collaboration, and high performance.

As you navigate your leadership journey, remain flexible and responsive to the evolving dynamics of your team.

You can also explore more content for engineering managers on practicalengineering.management. You will find there practical strategies for effective engineering leadership.

Join the community of impactful leaders to bridge the gap between inspiration and implementation with actionable steps that empower your team, boost trust, and drive real-world results.

If you would like to discuss any of your challenges, don't hesitate to reach out to me at mirek@practicalengineering.management.