The Unspoken Challenges of Engineering Leadership

Less Obvious, Yet Common Struggles in Leadership

You've just become an engineering leader - a tech lead, team lead, or engineering manager. Congratulations! You probably seek guidance on what skills you should develop in this position.

You will read about decision-making, team building, priorities management, and delegation. These are classic examples of skills each leader needs to invest in.

Let's look at that from a different angle. In this article, you will find the list of the most common challenges discussed during my mentoring sessions. These struggles are often less obvious yet raised by most engineering leaders I've ever worked with.

Hidden struggles of engineering leaders

Self-doubt

Fresh leaders struggle to understand how much added value they generate for the company. It's easier to capture the outcome of the code they produced or the features they delivered. In that light, team empowerment, 1:1s, expectations management, and decision-making are seen as distractors.

A good example here can be a performance review process. Writing feedback and discussing it with all teammates usually takes a few weeks. This period is often perceived as "admin work," where a leader delivers zero value while focusing only on "HR formalities."

How to change this perception and tackle the imposter syndrome? Engineering leaders must understand their performance comes from the value generated through others. It's less important how much code you produced or how many tickets you closed as a leader and, more important, what kind of influence and empowerment you brought to the team so their performance could go up. When managing a team, scale factors come to light. Growing and empowering your teammates is compound interest.

A leader's work outcome is also measured from a broader time perspective. As an individual contributor, you can see the results almost immediately after the code is deployed to production. A leader's impact is more subtle, but again - it can be compounding every single day.

To capture that, as a leader, you can track your value through quantitative data (e.g., technical or product metrics, KPIs) or qualitative data (team feedback). Observing changes in trends here can take weeks or months. You don't know how to start with tracking? See related materials at the end of this post.

Too much to handle

As a team manager, you will have much more things on your plate than you can process. Product work, admin tasks, meetings, team interactions - countless activities appear all the time in your to-do list.

You cannot commit to everything. And your job is to clearly communicate what you will and won't do. Rather than handling all requests and tasks, you need to find a way to decide the right things to focus on.

If you have too many requests:

Ensure what are priorities and use it as an ordered list of things to take care of.

Learn to say "no" to new requests unless it's clear which of your current priorities can be sacrificed.

Don't work after hours - limiting your time will force you to focus on the right things and give up on others.

If you have a hard deadline, keep reducing the scope. If your scope increases, extend the deadline.

The goal for all of these is to ensure you detach emotions from time & scope pressure. There will always be too much to handle. You need to learn how to deal with this situation for an extended time with peace of mind.

Balancing administrative tasks, meetings, and team interactions can be overwhelming. Prioritizing tasks and managing time effectively is crucial but not always straightforward. At the end of this article, I'm sharing some materials to help you with that.

Limited Authority

As an engineering leader, you are responsible for a team's performance. You also learn quickly that your authority is limited. You are the manager for your teammates, but your success depends on stakeholders and teams who don't report to you. They have their interests, priorities, and skills.

Fresh leaders often feel powerless. They have deadlines or objectives to achieve, yet their teams are stuck because:

The team they depend on has different priorities.

Their software architecture and implementation ideas are different than expected (from management, architects, and engineers from other teams).

They don't get enough support and guidance from stakeholders (no clear requirements or expectations, limited contact).

To tackle these problems, start with a simple assumption - you can do more than you initially thought. Sometimes it's 5% more, sometimes 50%. Your job as a leader is to maximize success. Focus on leadership without authority, which is also a skill you can practice.

Here's how:

Build Relationships: Establish strong, positive relationships with colleagues, team members, and key stakeholders.

Communicate Effectively: Listen actively to others and express your ideas clearly. Tailor your communication style to match the preferences of those you're working with.

Demonstrate Expertise: Become an expert in your field. Bring more data to the table, show numbers, opinions. Express that you are in control.

Be Reliable: Consistently deliver on your promises and meet your commitments.

Lead by Example: Model the behavior you want to see in others. If you want your team to be punctual, respectful, or hardworking, set the standard through your actions.

Find Common Goals: Identify shared goals and objectives. When everyone is working towards a common purpose, it's easier to gain support.

Be a Problem Solver: Be proactive in identifying, communicating, and addressing challenges.

Be Flexible: Adapt to changing circumstances and be open to new ideas and perspectives.

Practice Patience: Leading without authority can take time. Be patient and persistent, and don't be discouraged by setbacks.

Seek Feedback: Ask for feedback from those you're trying to influence. This can help you understand their concerns and improve your approach.

Good relationships are key to success. You can be surprised by how much you can achieve if others are "on your side."

Expectations management

When you lead a team, you know your people. You can assess their performance and understand their preferences - projects to work on, an environment that makes them flow, and the one distracting them. You could name high-performers, low-performers, or solid contributors.

Yet many leaders face this challenge - almost all of their people identify themselves as high-performing workers.

They show up every day.

They deliver what they are being asked for.

If they don't deliver, it's usually because of some external factors.

They already have a long track record of wins, so they deserve a promotion.

If you don't spend enough time mentoring them and managing the expectations, you usually face tough conversations during the most sensitive moments - performance review or salary review cycle.

To avoid that, here's what you should start doing as soon as possible:

Run regular 1:1 sessions with your teammates where you discuss current challenges, their performance, expectations, and goals.

Have a framework that says what's expected from junior/regular/senior. It can be either a company career ladder, if you have one, or your expectations written down somewhere as a reference.

If engineers meet expectations, they do a great job, which they are paid for. To deserve a promotion, they have to be outstanding.

Your goal is to ensure they know they are high-/mid-/low- performing ahead of time, so the performance review process is not surprising for them. But it's not only about that. Being clear with expectations and constantly showing what is the next step in their career helps them grow.

How can I help?

Let's talk

I hope that you find this article helpful. I wrote it to show that you are not alone in facing these challenges. Don't hesitate to share your story so I can help you with your struggles as an engineering leader. I'm waiting for you at mirek@practicalengineering.management.

Free content on PEM

Here are a few articles and materials that should help you with facing the challenges described in this blog post:

Being a leader is a lonely journey - you are not alone with your struggles. Let's find out how to build the support line for yourself.

1:1 - the essential tool for leaders - working 1:1 with your teammates is the most effective way to address challenges with your team.

Assess your manager's work, engineering leader - your manager owes you support. Here's what you should expect from them.

Simple data tracking solutions for engineering leaders - leader's work may be hard to capture. Here's how to bring some data and facts to your work.

Paid content on PEM

If you want to get more actionable hints and support, I invite you to check content for paying subscribers on Practical Engineering Management.

You will find there:

Leader's Week - a framework to maximize your weekly impact.

First Ten 1:1s for Engineering Leaders workbook.

Practical Solutions to Track Your Goals.

and others.