Conor: What advice would you give to 
future early stage founders with a product  
background or a technological background 
who might be listening to this podcast?
Brian: I think one is like, know what you're 
good at and what you're not great at, right?  
And then hire to fill those gaps around you. So 
for me, it's always been like, sort of a lot of  
introspection of where do I need other leadership 
to help us go faster as a company and whatnot.  
The other thing that's I think really tough as a 
startup founder tend to be like, really type A,  
go-getter, let's do it ourselves is like, you 
can't do everything yourself. And actually, if  
you try to do everything yourself, you're probably 
building an organization that's not going to scale  
past a certain point. I think that's 
why a lot of companies can get to the  
20-25 person stage. And at that 
point, it becomes really hard to scale  
because probably the founder has been doing 
everything and then sort of giving those  
jobs to other people becomes tough because all the 
knowledge around how to do these things has stayed  
in one person's head. It's all tribal, right? 
But I think it's specifically a problem for  
founder-led companies, especially if you're 
bootstrapping or something like that.  
The other thing I think is important is 
to understand how prospective investors  
and prospective employees see the opportunity 
to be really honest with yourself. Just like  
there's like different phases of a person's 
career. There's like different phases of how  
backable you are as a founder, right? If you've 
only worked for big companies all your life  
and you're coming out and you're doing your first 
startup, there's certain VCs that will just say  
like, hey, it's tough for me to back, show me 
that you can do it right before I write a check.  
If you're coming out of like, a startup or you've 
worked in that environment before, you've built  
those relationships or it's your second company. 
People look at you a lot differently. Sort of  
having that honesty with yourself, I think is 
super important. And then finally, don't be  
afraid to get out there. Pretty much everybody 
that has been through it that has been through  
it wants to help people that are going through it. 
And so don't be afraid to ask for help, to ask for  
mentorship and guidance and advice. People want to 
make connections and want to grow the next crop of  
great companies and founders and help them grow. I 
think that's one of the most exciting things about  
being a part of sort of the entrepreneurial 
community is that, I think by and large,  
people just applaud all the success that everybody 
has. There's not a lot of bad blood out there.