So you want to become better than 99% of
programmers. But you are doing the exact
same things that 99% of programmers are
already doing. Watching video tutorials,
doing online courses and solving Leetcode
problems. Everbody is doing that. Doing
what everyone else is doing is the very
definition of how to become average. And
there’s nothing wrong with that. But if you
want to get ahead of others, you have to be
willing to do what others are not willing to
do. Here are 5 such things you can do right now.
Most people think that programmers code all
day. In reality, programmers spend most of
their time debugging code. Breaking things and
fixing them is an essential skill to become a
skilled programmer. Yet, beginners don’t spend
any time learning the right way to debug code.
To get started with learning debugging, you can do
this course called Software Debugging on Udacity.
When I was a beginner, I would watch the
longest possible programming tutorial,
learn as many programming languages as
I could and build as many projects as
possible. In other words, I thought quantity
is all that matters. But in programming,
quality matters much more than quantity. One
great project on your resume can easily give
you an edge over someone who has
10 basic projects on their resume.
Let me ask you a question. During my last 2
years working as a Software Engineer at Google,
let’s assume that I have written a total of 10,000
lines of code? How many total lines of code do you
think I have read during the same period? It would
be easily 100,000 lines of code which is 10 times
what I have written. Yet, new programmers spend
no time reading code written by experienced
programmers. Go to Github and spend 30 minutes
trying to understand someone else’s code everyday.
The biggest disadvantage beginners face is
that often, they don't get the opportunity
to collaborate with experienced programmers.
As a result, they never learn what it’s like
to collaborate with other engineers on the team.
To solve this problem, you can start contributing
to open source projects. I will link a guide
in the description to help you get started.
To become a top 1% coder, you need to know what
a top 1% coder looks like. But where
can you even find a top 1% coder? At
conferences and meetups. To find meetups
happening near, you can use meetup.com.
But before you can do any of this, you need
to know How to think like a programmer. Watch
this video for that. My name is Sahil
and I will see you in the next one.